---
layout: post
title: The Coin Change Problem
---

### Question

There is a cashier who has been instructed by his superiors that whenever a customer has to be given a change it should be given in the <b>least number of coins possible</b>. 
<br>
<br>
As the cashier is not an expert of coding he requires you to create a program for him that will do this job for him and tell him what is the <b>least number of coins</b> that he can give as change.
<br>
<br>
You are given <b>N <em>(the number of different denominations of coins)</em>, C <em>(the change to be given)</em></b> and N different integers which tell the <b>denominations</b>. It can assumed that there is no such condition where the exact amount of chnage can't be returned and there is an unlimited supply of every coin.

### Overview

<div style="text-align: justify">
This is one of the classic questions that require <b>DP (Dynamic Prgramming)</b>, so I thought that it is important to discuss it. This question is a very popular one and is genrally one of the first questions of DP that many people encounter. It is a perfect example to demonstrate the <b>power of DP</b>.
</div>

### Approaching The Solution

_**I highly recommend you to try to find your own approach before reading mine**_

<div style="text-align: justify">
The first thing you should do is keep the <b>computer aside</b> and take out your <b>pen and a piece of paper</b>. Because many of us will be tempted to make an if-else construct to solve this question if we are not aware of DP. If you <b>make some examples</b> and try solving some questions you might get some idea of what the question requires you to do. 
<br>
<br>
After doing that you might something interesting. That the answer is not at all based on a greedy approach. For example if you have coins of <b>denominations <em>30, 7 and 1</em></b> and you have to return a change of 35. What our <b>basic instinct would suggest is to give a coin of 30 </b>to start it off. However, later we will have to give <b>5 coins of denomination 1</b>, which would make the total count <b>6</b>. Instead, if we use only coins of <b>denomination 7</b> then we can achieve the task in only <b>5 coins</b>, which is the best we can do in the given example. 
<br>
<br>
DP approach is the best way to solve this question. We can firstly make a grid of <b>dimensions (N)*(C+1)</b>. Let <b>i</b> be the row variable and <b>j</b> be the column variable. Any <b>i, j</b> on the grid represents what best we can do if have to return a <b>change of j and we have (i+1) different coins</b>. So we start by initialising the all the elements of <b>column 0 as 0</b> (obviously). Then we can simply intialise all the remaining elements of <b>row 0 as infinte except those values of j which are divisible by 0th coin</b>. For those psoitions we can fill in only the values of <b>j/i</b>. 
<br>
<br>
Looking at only the initialised part of our grid we see it makes sense. If we have <b>only one type of coin</b> and we have to return a change then only those changes can be returned that are <b>directly divisible by the coin's value</b>. 
<br>
<br>
Now comes the last part (and the most trickiest). We can now start <b>traversing our grid in top to down and left to right manner</b>. For all values of <b>j which are less than ith coin's value we can copy the value of the position i-1</b>, j. WHY?? Because it is like we are not even using that coin so the answer that we have obtained so far <b>won't change even if we have this new coin</b>. Now for all other values where j is greater than ith coin's denomination we have two choices: <b>either we don't use this coin, which would require us to do what we did in the above scenario, and the other choice that we have is that we use that use this coin.</b> So, to make a decision we would compare the value from the above cell to the value of <b>grid[i-1][j-c[i]] + 1 (we compare with this value because what we are doing is that subtracting the value of the coin from the change as that is already given and then using the best value that is avaiable for the left over change)</b>. We choose the lesser of the two values and in the end our answer is in <b>grid[N-1][C] (this position represnts that position where j is equal to our change and all the coins are take into account)</b>.
<br>
<br>
This might seem like a lot of work but later you will realise that it's the first step in a long flight of stairs.
</div>

If you need help with the code then here is mine-

```cpp
#include<bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
int main()
{
    //input
    int s, n;
    cin >> s >> n;
    int a[n];
    for(int i = 0; i < n; i++)
    {
        cin >> a[i];
    }
    int m[s+1];

    //intialise to max 
    for(int i = 0; i < s+1; i++)
    {
        m[i] = numeric_limits<int>::max();
    }

    //Dyamic Programming
    m[0] = 0;
    for(int i = 1; i <= s; i++)
    {
        for(int j = 0;j < n; j++)
        {
            if(a[j] <= i)
            {
                if(m[i-a[j]]+1 < m[i] && m[i-a[j]] != INT_MAX)
                {
                    m[i] = m[i-a[j]]+1;
                }
            }
        }
    }
    cout << m[s];
    return 0;
}
```
