---
title: Bellman Ford (Computing Shortest Paths)
---

<div style="text-align: justify" id = "Bellman">
This is an algorithm which is based on <b>Dynamic Programming</b>. The reason why we use it over Dijkstra is that it can deal with even those graphs which have <em><b>negative edge weights but not a negative cycle</b></em>. It is an <b>efficient algorithm</b> and is useful when dealing with certain types of problems. Negative weights cannot be dealt with Djikstra but Bellman Ford helps us to find a path through these <b>negative edges</b> which in turn decrease our total path length. However, no algorithm can deal with a negative cycle because we keep moving around that cycle again and again we will always get a shorter path than the previous ones. The Bellman Ford algorithm in turn also helps us to <b>detect negative cycles.</b>
<br>
<br>
  Basically, <b>Bellman Ford algorithm</b> is based on a simple concept. Firstly, in any shortest path we will never revisit a node ever because it never loops. Morever every precursor to our shortest path is in itself a shortest path till there. Here is where the <b>Dynamic Programming</b> comes in. This means that we have to keep computing the shortest paths for all of our node pairs and it will ultimately help us reach the desired solution.
<br>
  <br>
  In <b>Dijkstra's Algorithm</b> whenever we visit a vertex wwe update the value of the shortest paths from <b>there to all of its children</b>. However, in case of the negative edges this can turn out to be wrong because there might be <b>shorter path</b> that we find later on. Nonetheless this is of use in the <em><b>Bellman Ford Algorithm</b></em>.
<br>
<br>
Now we can try and understand the algorithm. Here is my code for Bellman Ford you can refer to it before moving any further.
</div>

```cpp
void Bellman(vector<pair<int,int> > adj[], int src, int V)
{
    // Mark all the vertices as not visited
    int dist[V];     // The output array.  dist[i] will hold the shortest
                     // distance from src to i
    //set distances to infinty                  
    for(int i = 0; i < V; i++)
    {
        dist[i] = INT_MAX;
    }
    dist[src] = 0;
    int v, w;
    int flag = 1;
    for(int j = 0; j < V-1; j++)
    {
	    for(int i = 0; i < V; i++)
	    {
	    	if(dist[i] == INT_MAX)
	    	{
	    		continue;
	    	}
	    	for(auto it = adj[i].begin(); it != adj[i].end(); it++)
	    	{
	    		v = it->first;
			w = it->second;
	    		dist[v] = min(dist[v], dist[i] + w);
	    	}
	  	}
	}
  cout << "Vertex Distance from Source" << endl;
  for (int i = 0; i < V; i++)
  {
     cout << i << " " << dist[i];
  }
}
```
<div style="text-align: justify">
  We start off by setting all the distnaces to <b>infinty (some very large value)</b>. We do this because we know for sure that our length has to be less than that and this value will help us compare the values. Obviously, we set the <b>dist</b> value of our source node as 0. So when we explore all the children of our source node we can <em><b>update</b></em> their values and at that point we know that that value has to be greater than or equal to the actual value. We came to a conclusion earlier that our path length is no more than <b>number of nodes minus - one</b>. The reason being that we dont have to visit any node more than once. 
<br>
<br>
This greedly upates all the values at the moment. We do this for every node not only for our source node V-1 times. Doing it V-1 times ensures that we have reached our answer becauuse we would have considered all of the combinations!!. This is the mian statement for Bellman Ford - <em><b>"Don't try to find the shortest path by looking for the best sequence just blindly compute all the sequences and choose the best value."</b></em>
</div>
